# March 2018 Progress 

## Content
* [Goals](#goals)
* [Week One](#week-one)
* [Week Two](#week-two)
* [Week Three](#week-three)
* [Week Four](#week-four)
* [My Thoughts](#my-thoughts)

### March 2018 Overview
***
* Loss of momentum from February trickled down to beginning of March.
* I switched from setting Result Oriented Goals & now focusing only on the Process Oriented Goals.
  * reason: Result Oriented Goals are not ideal for my situation because I don’t fully know all the requirements to achieve 
  said goals. I will rather focus on the Process Oriented Goals because if I’m averaging 13 Pomodoros of focused work daily, 
  doing only what’s necessary, i bet I’d get a lot of "results". 
* March 20: Life stuff was intensive, my little brother was admitted at the hospital for a week & I had to sit in for my parents 
at the retail shop. It affected my progress. (my fault though - I should’ve worked @ night time).
* Still working on [Project Three: Tower of Hanoi Solver](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/tree/master/projects_from_guide/project_three_tower_of_hanoi).
* New found momentum from focusing on the Process & ignoring the results.

## Goals
**March 2018 run from 4th March to 31st March 2018. ie *"4 weeks"* 2018.**

* Process Oriented Goals:
Work Everyday averaging 13 Pomodoros a day & 10 Pomodoros on days where life duties call (eg: going to the bank, helping family with work etc).

    | | No. of Working Days | Total Pomodoros | Average Pomodoro
    | --- | --- | --- | --- |
    | Full Days | 7 days | 101 | 14.4 |
    | Half Days | 5 days | 46 | 9.2 |
    | Total |  12 out of 25 days | 147 |  **7.3** |
    
* Once per month: do two or more of the following [as per the guide](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/blob/master/faq.md)
    * Write up a comprehensive blog post or markdown entry in a repository detailing the high points of what you learned that month. :white_check_mark:
    * Livestream what you're working on for an hour. Or, lend a hand to someone who needs help by screen-sharing and walking them through it. :x:
    * Do any of these :x:
      * Watch [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4NIb9l3imAo) and [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eg5-tdAwclo) - on interviewing
      * Read this - on crafting a resume
      * Do one lesson from [CUST104: Business Communications](https://learn.saylor.org/course/view.php?id=345) :x:

### Week One
***
* What I Did
  * Nothing :disappointed:

### Week Two
***
* What I Did
  * Got stuck coding the logic for Tower of Hanoi project. I regressed & wrote a better/clearer code-like pseudocode, 
  tested it well & wrote the code. It all looks good.
  * Organizing/refactoring the code.
  * Added user input
  * I place the functions & variables into separate files. *not sure if it's the right thing to do*
* What I Learnt & Challenges I Faced
  * I've detailed it in the project's [readme](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/blob/master/projects_from_guide/project_three_tower_of_hanoi/README.md)
    
### Week Three
***
* What I Did
  * Started working on the animation part of the project. 
* What I Learnt
  * I've detailed it in the project's [readme](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/blob/master/projects_from_guide/project_three_tower_of_hanoi/README.md)
 
### Week Four
***
* What I Did
  * Working on the animation part of the project ie moving disc from one peg to another.
  * Learnt about Callbacks & a lil bit about Async reading [YDKJS :Async & Performance](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/async%20&%20performance/README.md#you-dont-know-js-async--performance) 
  but stopped a few pages into the first chapter because I decided to just google tutorials on callbacks & read the book later 
  on for deeper understanding.
  * Started working on a task given to me by a mentor: **make a simple blog with basic CRUD functionality**. So I took time off 
  the Tower of Hanoi project. I used this tutorial Series as a guide [How to Build a Blog with Laravel](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLwAKR305CRO-Q90J---jXVzbOd4CDRbVx) 
* What I learnt & Challenges I faced
  * I've detailed it in the project's [readme](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/blob/master/projects_from_guide/project_three_tower_of_hanoi/README.md)
  * for the blogging project: 
    * I revised basic PHP & Laravel. *I used PHP & Laravel for my final school project*
    * I setup vagrant to use laravel Homestead as my Local Dev env. Why develop using a light weight virtualMachine (tailor made 
    for dev)  instead of downloading XAMP onto your local machine => so you can setup your light weight VM to be close to what 
    you ‘ll eventually have on your hosting platform…so less unexpected problems when you go live.
    * difficulty setting up the database for deployment. i used mySQL on my local environment but the host required users to 
    use postgreSQL which i had no experience with & mostly had to configure everything from the command line. 
  
  
### My Thoughts
***
* Breaking things down into functions & giving them meaningful names helps me read/understand code better. This also helps in 
debugging since all you have to do is follow the functions (& variables)
* Ways to make coding easy: write pseudocode, break everything into function.
* From working on the Tower of Hanoi project, I realized programming is all about, deciding which data structures to use, knowing 
the return types of functions, writing code to access the data you want.
* I think I spend too much time making the code look good.
* This caught my attention: Because JavaScript can be used without understanding, the understanding of the language is often never 
attained. from [YDKJS Async & Performance](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/async%20&%20performance/README.md#you-dont-know-js-async--performance) 
Preface.
* I think the time for learning is really after a project. Initially I thought I should learn alongside the project but it’s best 
to focus on the project, learn just enough of a skill/tool to use in the project. Then focus on learning/understanding the skills after 
the project.





