# April 2018 Progress 

## Content
* [Goals](#goals)
* [Week One](#week-one)
* [Week Two](#week-two)
* [My Thoughts](#my-thoughts)

### April 2018 Overview
***
* Started off with great drive, finished project [three](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/tree/master/projects_from_guide/03_tower_of_hanoi) 
then got complacent & I never recovered. Then I lost interest over time. I ended up wasting Too Much Time - almost 2 months (2 weeks in April, whole of May & almost 2 week in June). DAMN!!!
* Moral Lessons
  * You can't let a glimpse of success get to your head. 

## Goals
**April 2018 run from 1st April to 28th April 2018. ie *"4 weeks"* 2018.**

* Process Oriented Goals:
Work Everyday averaging 13 Pomodoros a day & 10 Pomodoros on days where life duties call (eg: going to the bank, helping family with work etc).

    | | No. of Working Days | Total Pomodoros | Average Pomodoro
    | --- | --- | --- | --- |
    | Full Days | 6 days | 86 | 14.3 |
    | Half Days | 1 days | 12 | 12 |
    | Total |  7 out of 20 days | 98 |  **4.9** |

### Week One
***
* What I Did
  * trying out new methods for animation for the tower of hanoi [project](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/tree/master/projects_from_guide/03_tower_of_hanoi)
  * worked on animating the disc ie moving it from 1 peg to another. Finished & it's working well :blush:
  * Changed the sizes of discs, colors etc.
  * Organize/refactor the code.
  * Wrote the project readme
* What I Learnt & Challenges I Faced
  * I've detailed it in the project's [readme](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/blob/master/projects_from_guide/project_three_tower_of_hanoi/README.md)
  

### Week Two
***
* What I Did
  * Decided to improve the UI so I begun to learn bootstrap basics.
  * started & finished a bootstrap 4 Tutorial Project
  * worked on UX of project using bootstrap 4
* What I Learnt & Challenges I Faced
  * Bootstrap & other frameworks & libraries for that matter helps increase development speed & can be used for quick prototyping
  * There's consistency with styles/themes/classes.
  * In responsive design if properties are not overridden they follow though to the next media query. they add up as usual.
  
### My Thoughts
***
* I like the mobile first approach.
* I like the idea that I don't have to design my layouts from the ground up.



