# July 2018 Progress 

## Content
* [Goals](#goals)
* [Week One](#week-one)
* [Week Two](#week-two)
* [Week Three](#week-three)
* [Week Four](#week-four)
* [My Thoughts](#my-thoughts)

### June 2018 Overview
***
* July is the model to follow. There were times momentum was high & i was flowing. And there were times I really wanted to 
pause/stop because of various reasons including complacency, exhaustion among several others. But in all I always Persevered
* Moral Lessons
  * Perseverance

## Goals
***
**July 2018 run from 1st July to 28th July 2018. ie *"4 weeks"***

* Process Oriented Goals:
Work Everyday averaging 13 Pomodoros a day & 10 Pomodoros on days where life duties call (eg: going to the bank, helping 
family with work etc).

    | | No. of Working Days | Total Pomodoros | Average Pomodoro
    | --- | --- | --- | --- |
    | Full Days | 14 days | 204 | 14.7 |
    | Half Days | 6 days | 50 | 10.2 |
    | Total |  19 out of 19 days | 254 |  **13.4** |

### Week One
***
- What I Did
  - FCC node.js lectures: Basic Node & Express
  - started FCC MongoDB & Mongoose lectures
  - finished FCC API & Micro-services lectures: MongoDB & Mongoose
  - started Following a Nodejs Tutorial Project to get a feel of how full stack app is built with Nodejs. 
  [link](https://www.safaribooksonline.com/videos/node-js-web-apps/9781491958940/9781491958940-video242242)
  - Jade view engine, CRUD using simple JSON as data storage, Routing & Middleware, working with API.
- What I Learnt
  - how to set up MongoDB & Mongoose in a node app
  - Various express route & middleware techniques such as
    - chaining diff http verbs to the same route,
    - getting input from user using the request parameter, query parameter or through the usual post request
    - chaining middlewares / handlers using the next function.
    - the body-parser middleware package
  - CRUD With Mongoose
  - working with Node on local machine. learnt the Jade syntax
  - Template engines: what they are & why they important
  - using express.router() to create mini-app instances & access the routing capabilities in our module without having to pass 
  in our main app instance into our modules.
  - postman. API testing tool.
  - What an API is. *been very confusing to me what it really is. is it a Server? etc*
    - An API is just a server that returns to the client side data upon request.
    - API is where the client makes a call to our web server & we return an object (data, methods) & use it to build up an 
    interactive client side app.
    - so the client side don’t have to go to the main server to ask for data, it interacts with the API, & the API interacts 
    with the server. The API acts as the middleman between Client Side & Server Side, & what is does it sending resources/data
- Challenges
  - are middlewares different from handlers.
  - took a while to understand what the done() was for in the fcc mongodb/mongoose challenges. It’s basically our
  error handler.
  - why module.exports is used for the export of functions instead of just exports i.e. What is the difference between Node's 
  module.exports and ES6's export

### Week Two
***
- What i did:
  - continued with [Node TP](https://www.safaribooksonline.com/videos/node-js-web-apps/9781491958940/9781491958940-video242242): 
  Logging & Debugging, Error Handling.
  - Started & Completed FCC's API & Microservices Projects: Timestamp Micro-service, Request Header Parser Microservice, URL 
  shortener Microservice, Exercise Tracker Project, File Metadata Microservice.
  - Setup a basic node app using (both pure node & express's generator) for testing purposes on my local machine.
- What I Learnt
  - Logging & Debugging Middleware in express: `express-debug`, `morgan`: an http request logger & `fs` to write to an output 
  stream.
  - learnt about Environment Variables & node’s process .env
    - They are variables that determine how your app should run/execute depending on your host environment/device.
    - The act of providing environment variables is referred to as `provisioning`.
    - When your Node.js process boots up it will automatically provide access to all existing environment variables by creating
    an env object as property of the process global object
    - You can Set or Override them & provide temporary variables through the console before running the node app eg `PORT=999 
    node app.js`
  - a little bit about Error Handling:
    - let express handle errors by passing in errors to the next().
    - write custom error handlers/middleware.
  - read about html form multipart/form-data [encoding type](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4526273/what-does-enctype-multipart-form-data-mean).
  - read more on API.
    - summary: when a company offers an API to their customers, it just means that they’ve built a set of dedicated URLs that 
    return pure data responses — meaning the responses won’t contain the kind of presentational overhead that you would expect in a graphical user interface like a website.
  - learnt Json Format & it’s data types.
  - I learnt earlier that the response object terminates the request/response cycle. But the Code after res.<send()> among 
  others is executed. Hence make sure that res.<send()> is the last code in a handler. example 
    ```javascript
      app.get(‘/test’, (req, res) => {
        res.send(‘end request/response cycle’); 
        res.send(‘after the end’);
      });
    ```
  - I've detailed the rest in the api projects [readme](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/blob/dev/fcc_projects/api_microservices/README.md) for more
- Challenges
  - refer to api projects [readme](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/blob/dev/fcc_projects/api_microservices/README.md).
- My Thoughts
  - I want to build more applications with nodejs to improve my backend skills.

### Week Three
***
- What i did:
  - read Express docs on Routing, Middleware, Template Engine & Error Handling
  - started reading mongodb docs on the Basics: Installation, CRUD etc
  - installed Mongodb locally.
  - used the mongo shell to manipulate the database.
  - used the MongoDB Node.js driver & mongoose in a dummy node app to connect to my mongodb database.
  - Started following FCC lectures on Information Security & Quality Assurance.
- What I Learnt
  - Passing multiple callback functions as arguments to the route handler. This can be used as some kind of route-specific middleware. 
  You can use this mechanism to impose pre-conditions on a route, then pass control to subsequent routes if there’s no reason 
  to proceed with the current route.
  ```javascript
    router.get('/seven/a', (req, res, next) => {                  // route-specific middleware
      if (req.params.firstname) {
        next();
      } else {
        res.send('condition failed');
      }
    }, (req, res) => {                                            // actual handler/controller
        res.send(`<p>firstname: ${req.params.firstname}</p>`);  
    });
  ```
  - You can also pass an Array of Callbacks to the route handler.
  - The Route path can be a stirng `'/user'`, string pattern `/ab?cd` or regular expressions `/a/`.
  - `process.cwd()` is an absolute path to the root director of the current node process.
  - You can skip the rest of the middleware functions from a router middleware stack, by calling
    next('route') to pass control to the next route.
    ```javascript
        app.get('/user/:id', function (req, res, next) {
          if (req.params.id === '0') next('route')  // if the user ID is 0, skip to the next route
          else next()                               // pass control to the next middleware function in this stack
        }, function (req, res, next) {
          // send a regular response.
          res.send('Regular User')
        })
        app.get('/user/:id', function (req, res, next) {
          res.send('Special User');
        })
     ```
  - used the mongod daemon & mongo shell. 
  - package-lock.json (newly added in npm 5): It's automatically generated for any operations where npm modifies either the 
  node_modules tree, or package.json. It describes the exact tree that was generated, such that subsequent installs are able to 
  generate identical trees, regardless of intermediate dependency updates.
  - Relational Databases (MySQL) vs Non-Relational Databases(MongoDB) [link](https://www.neonrain.com/blog/mysql-vs-mongodb-looking-at-relational-and-non-relational-databases/)
    - Relational databases uses tables & rows to represent & store data whiles non-relational databases represents data using 
    collections of Json document. RDB follows more strict rules whereas NoSQL is more free & dynamic. Both have their use cases.
    - If your data structure fits nicely into tables and rows, RDB will offer you robust and easy interaction with your data.
    - If your data seems complex to model in a relational database system, or if you find yourself de-normalizing your database
    schema or coding around performance issues you should consider using MongoDB.
  - a lot of ways to query the collection using the find() method. Some include
    ```javascript
      // given the collection "inventory"
      db.inventory.find( {} ) === db.inventory.find() // return all documents
      db.inventory.find( { status: { $in: [ "A", "D" ] } } )  // Query Operators
      db.inventory.find( { status: "A", $or: [ { qty: { $lt: 30 } }, { item: /^p/ } ] } ) // Logical AND & OR conditions
      db.inventory.find( { size: { h: 14, w: 21, uom: "cm" } } )  // Query on Embedded/Nested Documents
      db.inventory.find( { tags: { $all: ["red", "blank"] } } )   // Querying an Array
      db.inventory.find( { dim_cm: { $elemMatch: { $gt: 22, $lt: 30 } } } ) // Specify Multiple Conditions for Array Elements
    ```
  - how to connect mongodb to a node application & use the MongoDB Node.js driver to update the database.
  - Cursor Handling: A cursor is a pointer to the result set of a query. ie when you run a query looking for documents, what
  gets returned is a pointer to the results of that query rather than all of the results in one shot as it can be way to many 
  & will slow down the service. 
  (as it can be way to many & will slow down the service).
    - Executing db.collection.find() in the mongo shell automatically iterates the cursor to display up to the first 20 
    documents. Type 'it' to continue iteration.
  - How to iterate a cursor in the mongo shell
  - projection: returns the Specified Fields from a document (_id is returned by default).
  - Querying for Null or Missing Fields.
  - helmet.js: a node module which is a collection of 13 smaller middleware functions that set HTTP headers.
  - Hashing: A hash is basically a fingerprint of the original data- always unique. This is accomplished by feeding the original 
  data into a algorithm and having returned a fixed length result. To further complicate this process and make it more secure, 
  you can also salt your hash. Hashing is designed to be computationally intensive
    - Salting your hash involves adding random data to the original data before the hashing process which makes it even harder 
    to crack the hash.
    - BCrypt is a password hashing algorithm/function
- Challenges
  - A little unfocused during work, was thinking about other things 
- My Thoughts
  - using mongoose SchemaType Mixed in your design is bad don’t use it. And They don’t even manage the mixed type well.
  - I glad i was very consistent this week amidst lots of life stuff & planning.
  
### Week Four
***
- What I did
  - Completed FCC Lectures on Quality Assurance & Testing with Chai
  - Started FCC lectures on Advanced Node & Express. *Currently at Socket.io*
  - Followed the nodejs chatapp [tutorial project](https://github.com/intOppong/software_engineer_journey/tree/dev/tutorial_projects/nodejs_chat_app) 
  on auth with passport. 
  - Read passport Docs to get more understanding.
  - Organized node chat-app TP directory structure
  - Built socket.io [getting started](https://socket.io/get-started/chat/) basic chat-app
  - Started following a TP on [building socket.io chatapp with mongodb](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Y6mWhcdSUM)
- What I learnt
  - Chai: is a JavaScript testing (assertion) library that helps you check that your program still behaves the way you expect it to after you make changes.
    - Assertion: is a statement that a predicate (Boolean-valued function, i.e. a true–false expression) is always true at that point in code execution.
  - Mocha: Is a javascript testing framework on nodejs that has a lot of features for testing.
    - by default Mocha looks for a dir called test for files to test.
  - You can place scripts in your `package.json` file & run it from the terminal `npm run <scriptName>`. That's how mocha is mostly run.
  - API Calls are Async. Web interactions are asynchronous !!.
  - A headless browser is a browser without a graphical user interface. useful for testing web pages as they are able to render and understand HTML, CSS, and JavaScript the same way a browser would. eg Zombie.js for node.js
  - [Unit Testing vs Functional Testing](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2741832/unit-tests-vs-functional-tests)
  
    | Unit Testing | Functional Testing |
    | --- | --- |
    | Unit Test - testing an individual unit, such as a method (function) in a class, with all dependencies mocked up. | Functional Test - AKA Integration Test, testing a slice of functionality in a system. This will test many methods and may interact with dependencies like Databases or Web Services. |
    | Unit tests are written from a programmer's perspective. They ensure that a particular method of a class successfully performs a set of specific tasks. Each test confirms that a method produces the expected output when given a known input. | Functional tests are written from a user's perspective. These tests confirm that the system does what users are expecting it to. |
    | Unit tests tell a developer that the code is doing things right | functional tests tell a developer that the code is doing the right things. |
    | Unit test is done first | functional test assumes you already did the Unit test. Now we testing if it the right things were done not just anything regardless if anything was done right. |
  - Passport.js: If the authentication was successful, the user object will be saved in req.user.
    - export a function containing all the needed routes OR use express's mini app: `express.Router()` to define routes and export that? when some routes depend on a variable from the main app, export a funciton containing all the routes else use `express.Router()` to export route modules.
    ``` javascript
      // Export a function containing all the routes
      module.exports = function(app, db) {            
      app.get('/', (req, res) => {
        db.findOne()                       // db instance is needed in the routes
        res.send('home')
      });
      
      // express.Router()
      const router = require('express').Router()

      module.exports = router;

      router.get('/', (req, res) => {
        res.send('home')
      });
    ```
  - Strategies with Social Auth require you (the dev) to have at least a `Client ID` and a `Client Secret` which is a way for 
  the 3rd party to verify who the authentication request is coming from and if it is valid. THEY ARE NOT TO BE SHARED. 
  A common practice is to put them in your .env file and reference them like: process.env.GITHUB_CLIENT_ID.
  - To serialize an object means to break it’s properties down into a smaller unit so it can be easily accessed/transported/saved etc. When we serialize an object we store a (unique) part of the object for the session, so it's available for the next request to the app. Serialization is where the session is created & saved.
  - To Deserialize an object means use one known unit to assemble the whole object back together. Deserialization finds the user & makes it available to the app for the session.
  - Understood how the passport authentication process works.
  - Passport adds some properties to the req/res objects including
    - `req.user`: stores the user object after authenticating. Is also used as a check to verify if user is authenticated. It's also done with the `req.isAuthenticated` property
    - `req.logout()`: it sets `req.user` property to null & clears out the session.
    - `req.logIn()`: used to login a user
  - Expresses `req.app`:The app instance is available on the req object & is used to access application settings eg `req.app.get('env')` returns the development environment
  - done() as used in node is a callback that you can call when done executing a function.
    - done() in passport acts as the next() like in express i.e. it calls the next function in the stack. 
  - Sockets provide a bi-directional communication channel between a client and a server. This means that the server can push messages to clients. Whenever you write a chat message, the idea is that the server will get it and push it to all other connected clients. The main idea behind Socket.IO is that you can send and receive any events you want, with any data you want
  - Socket.io is composed of two parts: 
    - A server that integrates with (or mounts on) the Node.JS HTTP Server: socket.io module
    - A client library that loads on the browser side: socket.io-client module. `NOTE` During development, socket.io serves the client automatically for us so you only need one module for dev because io() defaults to trying to connect to the host that serves the page. Socket.io it automatically serve the client file to via `http://localhost:<port>/socket.io/socket.io.js`
  - Events are names used to match the client-side socket to the server-side socket. Each event has a corresponding data which it transports.
  - The 2 main functions used for communicating are `emit()` which sends out event and data & on() which listens for events & data.
- Challenges I faced
  - Don’t fully understand how chai-http works.
  - It's still a little confusing how the socket.io.js file is served to the client without a cdn link in the clients html. In socket.io basic chat-app tutorial, the file was served as if it existed in our directory: 
  `<script src="/socket.io/socket.io.js"></script>`

### My Thoughts
***
  -  FCC Advanced Node & Express tests are not stable & lectures are not detailed/simplified like the ones before it.

