# June 2018 Progress 

## Content
* [Goals](#goals)
* [Week Two](#week-two)
* [Week Three](#week-three)
* [Week Four](#week-four)
* [My Thoughts](#my-thoughts)

### June 2018 Overview
***
* I'm enjoying programming & life more. I'm more patient & I think its because I'm more consistent.
  * I'm eating better & actually liking it.
* Seeing results, no matter how small they are, is very huge motivational boost. example finishing 1 little lesson in FCC's curriculum.
* Moral Lessons
  * Consistency begets Results, Resuts begets Patience/Calmness

## Goals
***
**June 2018 run from 3rd June to 30th June 2018. ie *"4 weeks"* **

* Process Oriented Goals:
Work Everyday averaging 13 Pomodoros a day & 10 Pomodoros on days where life duties call (eg: going to the bank, helping family with work etc).

    | | No. of Working Days | Total Pomodoros | Average Pomodoro
    | --- | --- | --- | --- |
    | Full Days | 9 days | 136 | 14.3 |
    | Half Days | 2 days | 22 | 12 |
    | Total |  11 out of 20 days | 158 |  **7.9** |

### Week Two
***
* What I Did
  * Found a git strategy to help me organize my commits & code/projects into versions.
  * read / went through Bootstrap 4 Docs.
  * started to follow an intro bootstrap course.
  * teaching a friend to code: Bootstrap
* What I Learnt
  * you can specify the user connecting to a repo by adding username@github in your [remote “origin”] url=
  * various bootstrap components & utilities like cards, modals, spacing etc.
* Challenges I Faced
  * I don’t know the purpose of .gitconfig file. How different is it from .git/config in a repo.

### Week Three
***
* What I Did
  * learnt more about the DOM reading the book [DOM Enlightenment](http://domenlightenment.com/).
  * learnt Javascript Debugging using [Google developer guide](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/javascript/).
  * revised some Javascript: function prototypes, prototypal inheritance - OLOO, Delegation Design, Callbacks
  * started reading YDKJS Async & Performance but stopped. *I think there are enough new terms/concepts to convince me that i don’t need to
  be reading YDKJS at the moment.*
* What I Learnt
  * innerHTML is the holygrail of DOM Manipulation. it's the best & simplest method/way to add, remove content from the DOM.
  * All spaces are represented as text Nodes in the DOM tree. The code below returns childNodes of 3. NodeList (3) [text, a, text]
    ```html 
      <div id="demo"> <a>link</a>  </div>
    ``` 
  * Traversing the DOM.
    * Be aware that The firstChild(lastChild) properties among others include text/comment nodes. NOTE that whitespace characters 
    (space, enter, tab) are also text Nodes.
      ```html 
        <div id="demo"> <a id="link">google</a></div>  <!-- firstChild is a textNode (the whitespace) -->
        <div id="demo"><a id="link">lord</a></div> <!-- firstChild is the <a> element-->
      ``` 
  * the firstElementChild(lastElementChild) property ignores text/comment nodes so you only traverse the elements.
  * similarities/differences between HTMLCollection & NodeList.
* Challenges I Faced
  * YDKJS Async was confusing me with multiple new terms & concepts.
  
### Week Four
***
* What I Did
  * started working on FCC projects: Build a Tribute Page.
  * completed all Responsive Web Design Projects: Tribute Page, Survey Form, Product Landing Page, Technical Documentation & Personal Portfolio Website.
  * started & completed FCC basic Javascript Tutorials.
  * started & completed FCC ES6 Tutorials.
  * Applied to Chingu voyage as a backend (node.js) guy.
  * Doing FCC Node tutorials in preparation for the Chingu Voyage
* What I Learnt
  * Array methods that executes an operation/function on each element of the array eg map(), filter(), reduce().
  * Spread Operator, Rest Operator.
    * apply() works the same as spread operator as in they unpack an array into a functions argument.
  * Scoping differences between let, const & var.
  * using Arrow functions to write more concise anonymous functions.
  * Various uses cases of Destructuring Assignment on Objects & Arrays
  * default function paramenters…
* Challenges I Faced
  * Testing FCC projects took longer than expected.
  * took a while to understand how map(), filter(). reduce() works

### My Thoughts
***
* I’m getting better at using git/github in an organized way.
* I need to revise my notes before teaching someone else. lol.
* I want to totally rely on bootstrap for the frontend (to save time). So always find out the bootstrap way before thinking 
about writing custom css.
* Kyle Simpson (YDKJS: Async & Callbacks) really hates callbacks…lol
* Why do you have to wrap an object in () when it’s the only return in an arrow function but you don't have to do that for arrays, 
functions and the primitive types.
  ```javascript
    // WRONG
    let myFunc = () => {  // WRONG - syntax error, unexpected token
      a: "one",
      b: "two"
    };
    // CORRECT
    let myFunc = () => ({  // CORRECT - it's wrapped in ();
      a: "one",
      b: "two"
    });
  ```
* FCC lectures are pretty good introductions. They make you like the topic.
* I didn’t know the joy of finishing very little things was this big - Basic JS from FCC, i already know some JS but doing it & getting 
the checks & motivational feed backs is a great feeling. It’s addictive & you want more, so you keep going.



